---
title: Principles of Data Science
excerpt: This module covers methods and tools that comprise the typical data science pipeline. The content focuses on the practical use and deployment of a selection of data science techni…
---

<article class="md-content__inner md-typeset"><h1 id="principles-of-data-science">Principles of Data Science</h1><p>This module covers methods and tools that comprise the typical data science pipeline. The content focuses on the practical use and deployment of a selection of data science techniques including: data acquisition, information retrieval, exploratory data analysis, machine learning, data visualisation and presentation, best practises in big data, and data ethics.</p><h2 id="contact-sessions">Contact Sessions</h2><p>Lectures: Every Monday starting the 28<sup>th</sup> July @ 09h00-10h00 in TBD. Every Friday 13h00-14h00 in TBD.</p><p>Practicals: Every Tuesday @ 14h00-17h00 in NARGA H (Natural Science Building) </p><h2 id="description">Description</h2><p>Preliminary curriculum content (practical component parentheses): </p><ul><li>Week 1: Introduction (UNIX command line utilities) [Dunaiski] </li><li>Week 2: Data collection techniques (curl, Beautiful soup, and Scrapy) [Dunaiski] </li><li>Week 3: Introduction to Pandas Data processing (Pandas) [Dunaiski] </li><li>Week 4: EDA and Visualisation (EDA tools) [Dunaiski] </li><li>Week 5: Hypothesis Testing (Scientific methodoloy and Statistical tests) [Ngxande] </li><li>Week 6: Unsupervised Learning [Ngxande] </li><li>Week 7: Supervisded Learning [Ngxande] </li><li>Week 8: Neural Networks [Ngxande] </li><li>Week 9: TBC [Ngxande] </li><li>Week 10: Missing Data (Imputing missing data) [Dunaiski] </li><li>Week 11: Big Data techniques (PySpark and Dask) [Dunaiski] </li><li>Week 12: Ethics + Best Practices I [Dunaiski] </li><li>Week 13: Ethics + Best Practices II [Dunaiski] </li></ul><p>Topics for the projects: </p><ul><li><p>Project 1: Data collection, i.e., scraping, data processing, and exploratory data analysis.</p></li><li><p>Project 2: Unsupervised models. </p></li><li><p>Project 3: Supervisded models. </p></li></ul><h3 id="example-reports-from-the-2022-class-for-project-1">Example reports from the 2022 class for Project 1:</h3><ul><li><a href="/cs-assets/courses/data-science/files/2022_project1_vegetarianism.pdf">What is the cost of converting to vegetarianism?</a></li><li><a href="/cs-assets/courses/data-science/files/2022_project1_semigration.pdf">Is semi-gration occuring in the Western Cape?</a></li><li><a href="/cs-assets/courses/data-science/files/2022_project1_tiktok.pdf">What does it take to become viral on TikTok?</a>) </li></ul><h3 id="example-project-4-blogposts">Example Project 4 blogposts:</h3><ul><li><a href="https://github.com/bongomarcel/DataScienceProjectExamples/blob/main/ClassOf2022/2022_project4_recommendation_system.ipynb">Building a Content-based Job Recommendation System in Python</a></li><li><a href="https://github.com/bongomarcel/DataScienceProjectExamples/blob/main/ClassOf2022/2022_project4_moonboard_classifier.ipynb">A Proof-of-Concept for an Automatic MoonBoard Route Grader</a></li><li><a href="https://github.com/bongomarcel/DataScienceProjectExamples/blob/main/ClassOf2022/2022_project4_emoji.ipynb">Has the COVID-19 pandemic changed the way emojis are used?</a></li><li><a href="https://github.com/bongomarcel/DataScienceProjectExamples/blob/main/ClassOf2022/2022_project4_misinformation.ipynb">Misinformation</a></li><li><a href="https://github.com/bongomarcel/DataScienceProjectExamples/blob/main/ClassOf2022/2022_project4_disastertweets.ipynb">Natural Language Processing with Disaster Tweets</a></li><li><a href="https://github.com/bongomarcel/DataScienceProjectExamples/blob/main/ClassOf2022/2022_project4_yoga.ipynb">CNNs &amp; Transfer Learning: Yoga Asana Classification</a></li></ul><h2 id="mode-of-presentation">Mode of Presentation</h2><p>A traditional classroom approach. One 2-hour lecture and one 3-hour practical a week. The students must familiarise themselves with the content before coming to lectures and practicals by reading selected material catered to provide a high-level understanding of the concepts. The details of the concepts are further discussed in classes through a traditional but more interactive lecture delivery mode.</p><h2 id="prerequisites">Prerequisites</h2><p>Programming (will mostly use Python but also dedicated programming languages) and Mathematics (at least first-year level). Prior machine learning is not required but a firs-year level of statistics will make things easier. Some programming tasks require development on Linux (Windows will not cut it, no guarantees for MacOS). </p><h2 id="outcomes">Outcomes</h2><p>After completing this module the student should be able to: </p><ul><li><p>Attained comprehensive knowledge about the foundations of data science methodologies, a solid understanding of data science tools and best practises </p></li><li><p>Choose the most appropriate tools and methodologies to answer questions from given data. Furthermore, the students will be able to judge the data needs required to answer questions sufficiently. </p></li><li><p>The student will be equipped with all the tools required to successfully solve common data science problems. </p></li></ul><h2 id="technicalities">Technicalities</h2><p>The practical course material will be shared through GitLab repositories and Jupyter notebooks. The courses repository may be found <a href="https://git.cs.sun.ac.za/Computer-Science/data-science/2025/data-science-course-notebooks">here</a>.</p><h2 id="assessments">Assessments</h2><p>You will be required to submit 3 projects which together count 45% and one final exam (40%). The remaining 15% are made up of in-class work assignments and practical tests.</p><h2 id="instructors">Instructors</h2><p>Dr. <a href="https://marceldunaiski.pages.cs.sun.ac.za/">Marcel Dunaiski</a></p><p>Dr. <a href="https://ngxandem.pages.cs.sun.ac.za/">Mkhuseli Ngxande</a></p><h2 id="academic-integrity">Academic Integrity</h2><p>The university's policy on plagiarism and collaboration applies throughout the course and is strictly enforced. It is the students' responsibility to familiarise themselves with the regulations in this regard.</p></article>
